---
title: "Assessing Patterns of Opioid Use, Misuse or Aberrant Use for Postoperative Pain"
excerpt: "With data collected from over 100 patients, we analyzed the quantity and frequency at which opioid- or valium-containing drugs were taken based on patients' verbal and written self-reports, electronic cap openings, and official medical records."
date: 11-23-2020
collection: portfolio
---

This project is a collaboration between Northwestern's Master of Science in Analytics program and Feinberg School of Medicine. A formal publication may be under the way.

Executive Summary
-----------------

With opioid misuse as a widespread issue, healthcare providers seek answers to how much opioid-containing substance should be prescribed to properly help patients manage postoperative pain. 
The purpose of the study is to investigate the number of pills healthcare providers should prescribe to help adolescents control postoperative pain. Prescribing too many pills can lead to drug misuse, while prescribing too few can limit patients’ access to pain relievers when actually needed. In this report, we will discuss patterns of pill use after patients’ are discharged, including but not limited to the extent to which opioid- and valium-containing drugs reduce pain, and the level of consistency between patients’ self reports and their medical records. We hope the insights from this report will help healthcare providers optimize the number of prescribed pain relievers to avoid abuse, waste, and/or prolonged pain.
Our exploratory data analyses confirmed that opioid- and valium-containing medicines can effectively reduce postoperative pain at a statistically significant level. Patients who used opioid-containing pills as their main pain reliever experienced higher pain on average than those who primarily relied on valium- and non-opioid-containing medicines. However, we failed to find any signals of opioid sparing effect from the current dataset. Since we have a limited sample size and pain score is a relatively subjective metric, it is not unreasonable that we reached this conclusion. Nevertheless, the above findings are robust when considering the change in pain score as percentage of initial pain level as well as normalized pain scores, which minimize the impact of individual differences. 
With regard to detecting patterns of use, misuse, and aberrant use from the provided data, we have concluded that neither patients’ self reports (diary and phone follow-up) nor records of eCaps openings provide an objective view of how patients are taking opioid- or valium-containing drugs at home. This is due to the fact that a) many patients (or their immediate family members) are fairly inconsistent with their diary entries, either reporting the wrong hours, medicine names and intake amounts or omitting an entire event, day, or week from the entry, and b) the official records of eCap openings do not directly reflect the number of pills taken by the patients. In a number of cases, we have observed patients taking multiple pills from the eCap bottle at the same time, retrieving multiple pills from the eCap bottles to be taken at a later time, or opening eCap bottles without using any of the pills. These patterns of behaviors appear to be occurring at random, with no correlation to any of the features in our data set (demographics, pain scores, drug types, etc.). The inconsistency between different sources of data complicated our project.
An additional challenge we faced, partially induced by the amount of inconsistency we have observed, is the small size of the sample. Most statistical tests and prediction models require a large enough sample to generate reasonable results. To compensate for some of the missing and questionable data from patients’ self reports, we employed data imputation methods based on our best judgment of how patients would likely have done in a missing entry given what we know about the patient’s other records. We will discuss data imputation in detail in Section 6.
