---
title: 'Reflections - From a Good Student to a Good Practitioner of Life'
date: 2020-12-07
permalink: /posts/2020/12/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - life
---

People say time flies when you're out of college. I say it is especially true in the midst of a pandemic. Remote grad school during Covid can be lonely at times, but for the most part, it's going better than I expected. It is also towards the end of 2020, and on the last day of my first quarter of graduate school, I feel the urge to at least write something about how I spent the past one and a half years navigating a period of eyeopening experiences, unforeseen challenges, and the realization that perseverance through adversity can only prevail if you stay true to yourself, the practice of which requires radical transparency and effective communication, a skill that I had not fully developed when the chapel bell rang and I was declared an official graduate of a sweet liberal arts college in the purple valley of western Massachusetts.

Transitioning from a student in the warm, loving, and artless embrace of the mountains that inspired <i>Moby Dick</i> and American Transcendentialism to a down-to-earth practitioner of life is not easy. Just the other day I was requested to share my common app essay from eons ago, a personal statement that only yielded a 25% success rate (but got me exactly where I wanted to go nonetheless), and I had to reiterate to everyone I helped (or will help) that these words no longer represent who I am and what I think and, for my self-deprecating humor and your amusement, I will share a few sentences here:

>    <i>...simplicity is the quality I value most. Once more I dream of living in an agrarian republic, the one envisioned by ancient Roman philosophers and Thomas Jefferson. These are the intimate communities where people are devoid of the superficial complexities that modernization has wrought. I cannot imagine myself as an office worker, constrained by business suits and confined by walls. Nature is the ultimate freedom... Turning over the pages of the Bible and classical mythology, I would have a silent conversation with sages, poets, warriors, and God... Music is not a mere pattern of sound; it is divinity wrought in the form of air. In nature and in song sprang the Platonic image of myself &ndash; the self I wish to be now but realize the journey may take ten, twenty years. Simplicity is my goal. I will pursue a life of moderation, standing in my own utopia, the middle ground of civilization...Just as a piece of lichen, I belong to nature, and will serve nature as long as I'm capable.</i>

(Needless to say, I drafted my college essay during a literature class after 20 pages of assigned reading of Thoreau. And yes, once upon a time I wanted to be a philosophy major &ndash; which ultimately did not happen after taking two semesters of intense debate on the reality of time and space in actual philosphy classes. And I was obsessed with the idea of farming or owning a farm &ndash; what ended my obsession was a 30-day experience of planting tobacco on a Virginian farm while dressing in colonial costumes and trying to endure the physical challenge of being severely allergic to dogs and oak trees.)

Nevertheless, some parts of the "Platonic self" have remained true to this day. I still look forward to a "simple", moderate life &ndash; and even though to my parents' dismay, part of that life may sometimes entail a "complete lack of fashion sense in daily life," I've always made sure to dress nicely at proper times and proper locations. I still cherish genuine, unaffected human interactions, but have also come to realize and embrace the fact that genuineness and social formality are not mutually exclusive. I'm still an environmentalist, I still enjoy a quiet, reflective lifestyle within a suburban bubble, but I'm also invigorated by the resources, inventions and advancements that cities and corporations have to offer. And I can absolutely envision my future self as a more mature, down-to-earth version of the past self, dressed in business attire and attuned to the environment around me (and herefore, to any future employers or managers who may see this post, rest assured that I will show up to meetings 5 minutes early, dress properly, and exercise my best possible professional demeanor). 

... to be continued
