---
title: 'Bias Detection (Research Journal 2)'
date: 2020-12-20
permalink: /posts/2020/12/bias-detection-2/
tags:
  - research
  - data science
  - media
---

To further my research on bias detection and news credibility, I need to form a clearer definition for these qualitative concepts.

Bias can be assessed in different ways &ndash; traditional AI tools are great at analyzing what’s written in textual form. We can use NLP to identify sentiments (positive vs. negative &ndash; a binary indicator), topics, and authorship (based on frequency analysis). These tools allows us to assess bias explicitly via textual evidence.

Defining bias in linguistics terms is very difficult, and it is more of a philosophical rather than quantitative topic. However, media scientists and news readers are well aware of the political leanings and potential partisan biases on important issues as presented in the media. [Media Bias Fact Check](www.mediabiasfactcheck.com) provides bias ratings for all national and local news outlets. [AllSides.com](www.allsides.com) collects and promotes readership for news with different political leanings given a specific issue. These media research and education sites, in addition to a wide variety of news APIs available in public domains, can help me identify linguistic (sentiment, lexicon) and non-linguistic (readership, metadata) features associated with news from all sides.

I would also like to investigate coverage and selection bias, which requires us to look at what's not being reported. We won't be able to rely on explicit textual evidence for these kinds of analyses. AI tools are not great at detecting bias based on decisions and sentiments behind the scene. However, by comparing word frequencies, topics, and writing styles across different news sites, we can identify what’s being intentionally omitted or abstractified.

The idea of bias naturally leads to the question of credibility. Rieh and Danielson defines news credibility from four perspectives: fairness (bias), goodwill (intention), accuracy (exactness of fact) and validity (strength of argument) (Rieh et al., <i>Credibility: A Multidisciplinary Framework</i>). Readers’ perception of fairness, or bias, contributes largely to their subjective assessment of news trustworthiness. But in most cases, this perception operates on pre-existing beliefs which impact the way we select and receive information &ndash; if one's already decided that Fox news is fake news, then they would most certainly not be using Fox news as a source of reliable information. So the question is, can journalists affect or change our a priori beliefs, and if so, how? By changing reporting style or the medium through which news is delivered? These are the questions I will strive to answer further down the road.
