---
title: 'Bias Detection (Research Journal 2)'
date: 2020-12-20
permalink: /posts/2020/12/bias-detection-2/
tags:
  - research
  - data science
  - media
---

To further my research on bias detection and news credibility, I need to form a clearer definition for these qualitative concepts.

Bias can be assessed in different ways &ndash; traditional AI tools are great at analyzing what’s written in textual form. We can use NLP to identify sentiments (positive vs. negative &ndash; a binary indicator), topics, and authorship (based on frequency analysis). Through these tools, we can assess bias explicitly via textual evidence. To do so, we need to define what ‘bias’ entails in linguistic terms. 

Defining bias in linguistics terms is very difficult, and it may be more of a philosophical discussion than a data science topic. However, media scientists and news readers are well aware of the political leanings and potential partisan biases on important issues as presented in the media. www.mediabiasfactcheck.com provides bias ratings for all news outlets, national and local. www.allsides.com collects and promotes readership for news from “all sides” given a specific issue. These educational sites, plus a wide variety of news APIs available in public domains, can help me identify any linguistic (sentiment, lexicon) or non-linguistic (readership, metadata) bias associated with those news outlets.

Another thing I would like to investigate is selection bias. Often bias lies more in what’s not being reported. AI tools are not great at detecting bias implicitly because there’s the fundamental question of what kind of proxy can we use to concretize bias that’s not written down on paper. The approach in the last paragraph can also be used here - by comparing word frequencies and styles across different news sites, we can identify what’s being intentionally omitted or abstractified. 

The idea of bias naturally leads to credibility. Rieh breaks down news credibility into 4 pieces: fairness (bias), goodwill (intention), accuracy (exactness of fact) and validity (strength of argument). Readers’ perception of fairness, or bias, contributes largely to how a news article is viewed. But in most cases, this perception operates on pre-existing beliefs which impact the way we select and receive information - for instance, if we’ve predetermined that Fox news is fake news, then we won’t be using Fox news as a source of reliable information that shapes our subsequent beliefs. So the question is, can journalists affect or change our preexisting beliefs, and if so, how? By changing reporting style or the medium through which news is delivered? These are the questions I will strive to answer throughout my research process.
